### lista 5


# zadanie 3
-zeby nie mogl listowac read nie moze byc dla katalogu,
-bit lepkosci uniemozliwia innym uzytkownikom usuwanie
lub zmienianie plikow w obrebie katalogu
dla pliku: 
chmod +t nazwa_katalogu
-setgid to kontrola sposobu dziedziczenia grupy
dla nowo tworzonych plikow, dziedzicza grupe
glowna folderu zamiast uzytkownika ktory go stworzyl
chmod g+s nazwa_katalogu
zas dla plikow wykonywalnych odpalane sa z przywilejami
uzytkownikow do grupy
-/tmp jest 1777 ale t oznacza ze kazdy uzytkownik
moze tworzyc ale tylko wlasciciel moze usunac
-/usr/local drwxr-xr-x. wlasciciel ma pelne prawa, zas
w obrebie grupy i others moga uzywac ale nie zmieniac

# zadanie 4 
    LABEL=GUMIAK: This option indicates that the filesystem to be mounted has the label "GUMIAK". Instead of specifying the device's path directly (like /dev/sdX1), using the label allows for more flexible and predictable mounting, especially when dealing with removable drives where device paths may change.

    /media/gumiak: This is the mount point where the filesystem will be mounted. In this case, it's set to /media/gumiak.

    vfat: This specifies the filesystem type, in this case, VFAT (FAT32).

    defaults: This option is a shorthand to specify a set of default mount options. It typically includes options like rw (read-write), suid (allow setuid), dev (interpret character or block special devices), exec (allow execution of binaries), auto (mount automatically at boot or when the mount -a command is issued), and async (asynchronous I/O).

    user: This allows ordinary users to mount the filesystem. Without this option, only the superuser (root) can mount filesystems.

    noauto: This prevents the filesystem from being automatically mounted at boot. Instead, it needs to be explicitly mounted by the user or administrator.

    umask=077: This sets the default permissions for newly created files and directories on the filesystem. In this case, it sets the permissions such that only the owner has full access, while group and others have no access.

    noexec: This option prevents execution of binaries on the filesystem. It's a security measure that can be useful for removable media to reduce the risk of executing malicious code accidentally.

    0 0: These values are related to filesystem checks. The first value (0) indicates that the filesystem won't be checked by fsck at boot time. The second value (0) specifies the order in which filesystems are checked; since this is a non-root filesystem, it's set to 0

# zadanie 5
sudo mount -t tmpfs -o size=2G tmpfs /mnt/ramdisk

dd if=/dev/urandom of=/mnt/ramdisk/container.tc bs=1M count=2048
sudo losetup /dev/loop0 /mnt/ramdisk/container.tc

# zadanie 6 
sudo zramctl --find --size 2G
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/zram0

sudo mkdir /mnt/zram
sudo mount /dev/zram0 /mnt/zram

dd if=/dev/urandom of=/tmp/testfile bs=1M count=100
sudo dd if=/tmp/testfile of=/dev/zram0 bs=1M
